---
layout: post
title:  "Data Analysis for Africa Forest Forum's (AFF) Study on Strengthening Adaptation Policies 
and AFOLU based Climate Change Mitigation Interventions in Anglophone Africa. "
author: SiliconBlast
categories: [ Earth and Environmental Science, GHG Emission Modelling ]
image: "https://images.unsplash.com/photo-1572908721147-0a9eb395762d?ixid=MXwxMjA3fDB8MHxwaG90by1wYWdlfHx8fGVufDB8fHw%3D&ixlib=rb-1.2.1&auto=format&fit=crop&w=2850&q=80"
featured: true
hidden: true
---
> Climate change presents a daunting threat to natural resource systems the world over. There are glaring scientific evidence that human induced climate change has impacted negatively on socio-economic and ecological systems resulting in poverty and food insecurity.

The study was conducted in seven Anglophone countries in Africa to determine adaptation patterns to climate change in flood and drought conditions within forestry sector; assess their success levels, and examine conditions for wider adoption of the most successful interventions. The study adopts multiple of approaches to elicit information from relevant stakeholders at different levels across the region such as policy makers and practitioners through Agency/Establishment questionnaire surveys, Key Informant Interviews (KII), desk review, and analysis of national and international policy instruments as NAMAs, NAPAs & NDCs.

The data collation and analysis were carried using Excel and R statistics with two prong analysis involving both aggregated and disaggregated data presentation for general overview and country specific scenarios. The success levels of adaptation interventions were assessed on a weighted scale of 0 – Nil, to 5 – High, and applied to determine aggregate impact pooled from indicators as extent to which target beneficiaries were reached, extent of adoption and utilization of given interventions, extent of the participation of women and the extent to which the targeted climate change challenge was resolved.

The results obtained indicates that adaptation interferences are largely planned, autonomous, or a blend of both. The most successful practices in different countries with impact levels above 80% include: Agroforestry particularly in Nigeria, Tanzania, Zimbabwe; Alternative Livelihood in Ghana, Zambia; Control of Forest Fire in Nigeria and Ecological Restoration among others. These are successful in solving climate change problems and in women participation at rating of ≥ 80%. The practices are widely adopted based on conditions which include, easy to adopt in cost and technique, community support and participation, more directly addressing the needs of people, high level of sensitization and awareness. It is recommended that the most successful and   promising adaptation practices identified by stakeholders in country specific context should be up scaled, promoted and accorded greater priority in extant policy of agriculture and forestry for greater effectiveness.