---
layout: post
title:  "ESMF - Environmental and Social Management Framework for REDD+ Program in Nigeria"
author: SiliconBlast
categories: [ Earth and Environmental Science, GHG Emission Modelling ]
image: "https://images.unsplash.com/photo-1590246193710-52b0215084e6?ixid=MXwxMjA3fDB8MHxwaG90by1wYWdlfHx8fGVufDB8fHw%3D&ixlib=rb-1.2.1&auto=format&fit=crop&w=2534&q=80"
featured: true
hidden: true
---
> In the implementation of REDD+, the focus is aimed at minimizing risks and maximizing benefits for populations potentially affected by REDD+. To minimize risks and maximize benefits for local populations, REDD+ program managers and donors work towards assessing and predicting impacts during the program design phase.

The rationale for the ESMF is that under the World Bank’s Operational Policy (OP) 4.01, it is required that an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) be prepared which will establish a mechanism to determine and assess future potential environmental and social impacts of project investments and then to set out mitigation, monitoring and institutional measures to be taken during design, implementation and operation of the subproject’s activities. This is aimed at minimizing adverse environmental and social impacts to acceptable levels.

The primary objective of this ESMF is to identify the environmental and social risks associated with projects, anticipate the potential project impacts, and to develop guidelines for assessing, monitoring and mitigating any adverse environmental and social impacts, from activities funded under the project. In order to improve decision making and to ensure that the design, implementation and operation of REDD+ intervention activities being considered under the proposed Strategic Options are undertaken in an environmentally and socially sustainable manner. The secondary goal is to ensure that in-country capacity, regulatory framework; principles and procedures are established to provide a basis for environmental assessments of all sub-projects to be carried out under the strategic options. Therefore, the purpose of the ESMF is to: 
- Establish effective approaches and methodologies for the environmental and social assessment, under the REDD+ mechanism 
- Specify appropriate roles and responsibilities of stakeholders, and outline the necessary reporting procedures, for managing and monitoring environmental and social concerns related to project interventions; 
- Carry out needs assessment to determine the training, capacity building and technical assistance needed to successfully implement the provisions of the ESMF
- Provision of useful information on resources for implementing the ESMF.

The study adopted a mix of participatory research methods that include: desk review of relevant literature including laws, act and policy documents at federal state and local levels. Moreover, interactive discussions and consultation were carried out with some stakeholders including the MDAs at state and national level to elicit useful information for the development of ESMF. The approaches used for consultation include workshops and one-on-one interview. Field visit to selected communities among the participating states and one state in each geo-political zone to have a national outlook of the situation was carried out.  Using interactive and focus group discussions, in-depth interviews, key informant interviews, and observations were some of the approaches adopted during the field visit for data collection.