---
layout: post
title:  "Data Analysis for SESA (Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment) for Nigeria REDD+ Readiness"
author: SiliconBlast
categories: [ Earth and Environmental Science, GHG Emission Modelling ]
image: "https://images.unsplash.com/photo-1542775870-d55741bd66bc?ixid=MXwxMjA3fDB8MHxwaG90by1wYWdlfHx8fGVufDB8fHw%3D&ixlib=rb-1.2.1&auto=format&fit=crop&w=3156&q=80"
featured: true
hidden: true
---
> Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation (REDD+) is one of the international policy instruments and mechanism currently being developed with the goal of combating climate change by reducing the emissions of greenhouse gas caused by deforestation and degradation of the forests in developing countries.

Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation (REDD+) is one of the international policy instruments and mechanism currently being developed with the goal of combating climate change by reducing the emissions of greenhouse gas caused by deforestation and degradation of the forests in developing countries. One of the targets in the implementation of REDD+ as a climate change mitigation programme is to ensure that REDD+ activities do not impose negative impacts on the people particularly the local communities. Moreover, REDD+ is to deliver on benefits beyond carbon and avoid potential risks to the environment and social well-being. REDD+ (“plus”) goes beyond deforestation and forest degradation and includes the role of conservation, sustainable management of forests and enhancement of forest carbon stocks.  

The Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) is a tool that seeks to integrate social and environmental considerations into policymaking processes, leading to making REDD+ policies and programs more sustainable. It supports the design of the National REDD+ policy framework, including the National REDD+ Strategy. SESA is therefore essential for avoiding the negative impacts and enhancing the positive REDD+ benefits, especially regarding socioeconomic, cultural, and livelihood development gains, governance enhancements, and broader environmental or biodiversity benefits. SESA has the strategic objective of integrating social and environmental concerns into the policy-making process of REDD+. SESA is complemented by an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), leading to making REDD+ policies and programs more sustainable.

The SESA study process entailed:
- Conducting an Environmental and Social Assessment of the REDD+ implementation to identify and assess the potential environmental and social impacts.
- Appraising the programme activities and determine any potential negative and positive impacts on the environment 
- Carrying out consultations with relevant stakeholders, including local communities, relevant MDAs, Private sectors, CSOs/NGO’s,etc, to obtain their views and suggestions regarding the environmental and social impacts of the programme which will be reflected in the SESA document
- Identifying existing and expected environmental regulations (Local, State, Federal) 
- Preparing an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) detailing mitigation measures as well as institutional roles and responsibilities in the operationalization of the ESMF.