---
layout: post
title:  "Modeling Emissions & Emission Reduction from Circular Economy Analysis in the Waste Management Sector"
author: SiliconBlast
categories: [ Earth and Environmental Science, GHG Emission Modelling ]
image: "https://images.unsplash.com/photo-1495556650867-99590cea3657?ixid=MXwxMjA3fDB8MHxwaG90by1wYWdlfHx8fGVufDB8fHw%3D&ixlib=rb-1.2.1&auto=format&fit=crop&w=4950&q=80"
featured: true
hidden: true
---
> This study was commissioned to analyze the impact of the CE in the waste management sector of Nigeria so that its outcome can be incorporated into the NDC revision 2021-2025. Its objectives included a review of the existing policies, regulations and projects in the country; an analysis of waste management projects highlighting the synergies and differ- ences between circular economy -related initiatives; collection, collation and validation of relevant data for waste emissions estimation; simulation of waste and emission reductions; and the development of a list of results to be considered for the NDC revision.

## Approach and Methodology
The study adopted multiple approaches to tracking Circular Economy in the waste man- agement sectors through document reviews, engagements with relevant stakeholders in the public and private sectors, institutional surveys, data analysis and modelling.

Data sets of Solid Waste Disposal Sites (SWDS) were obtained from the Federal Min- istry of Environment for waste (in kg) characterized by states in Nigeria from 2007 - 2017. The data sets were further refined for consistency with the IPCC model utilized for emissions estimation from the waste sector. The data from SWDS were complemented with data obtained from other sources, namely; Population data and projections from the World Bank database; Industrial Waste data derived from GDP factored against waste generation rates. These were combined with assessments was made of the operations of the Extended Producer Responsibility (EPR) programme by a detailed questionnaire survey and interactive sessions with the Producer Responsibility Organizations (PROs) in four major waste streams, namely, Food and Beverage Alliance (FBRA), Electrical and electronics (EPRON), Plastics and Batteries (ARBR). The questionnaire utilized for the survey was designed among others, to delineate the waste reduction and emis- sions reduction potentials from the activities of these organizations. The data obtained from PROs were supplemented with secondary data from private sector players and the websites from donor partners and international development organizations dedicated to various waste streams. The information and data provided were validated in physical and virtual meetings with key stakeholders.

In conducting our waste emission modelling, we relied on the data sets obtained from the various identified sources. However, the primary data obtained from the Federal Ministry of Environment lacked emission factors like the fraction of Degradable Organic Carbon (DOC), it contained no DOC composition data for wood and the dataset has inade- quate historical waste data for at least 50 years that are critical to accurately calculating methane emissions. In mitigating some of the gaps in the primary data source, we looked to secondary data sources to augment the activity data for modelling. To achieve this, we added new parameters like Fraction of DOC (DOCf), Methane correction factor (MCF), Half-life rate constant (k), and Wood composition data.

## Municipal waste data modelling
The annual municipal solid waste (MSW) is com- puted as the population (millions) multiplied by the waste per capita per year (kg). Population estimates and population growth rate for Nigeria from 1960 - 20020 was ob- tained from the World Bank database. In estimating the population growth rate, we used the average growth rate over a rolling 10-year window to predict future population growth rate. For waste per capita modelling, Nigerians generate 0.58kg of solid waste per person per day [1]. To authenticate this secondary data source, [2] reports that the waste generation for low-income countries is 0.5 kg/capita/day. To compute the waste per capita, we evaluate 0.5 x 365.

## Industrial waste modelling
Total industrial waste is computed as the gross domes- tic product (GDP, millions) multiplied by the waste generation rate (Gg/$m GDP/yr). To make GDP projections for the years 2020 - 2030, we used a recurrent neural network (RNN) deep learning model. RNNs are developed to solve learning problems where infor- mation about the past (i.e., past instants/events) are linked to making future predictions [3]. In this case, the model learns the underlying statistical structure of past GDP values to predict future GDPs. For waste generation rate, we calculate it as one-fifth of the total municipal solid waste (MSW) divided by the GDP for year at time t.
For Solid Waste Disposal Site (SWDS), we report estimates for methane (CH4) from solid waste disposal sites (SWDS) as part of carbon accounting from the waste sector in Nigeria from 1960 2030. Various methods exist for estimating CH4 emissions from SWDS. These methods are included in the First Order Decay (FOD) methods. In it, we assess three tiers for estimating CH4 emissions from SWDS. Where in Tier 1, factors for estimating CH4 emissions are mainly based on IPCC default activity data and default parameters. In Tier 2, emission accounting requires good quality country-specific activity data along but also allow for the use of some default parameters. And in Tier 3, estimations require the use of good quality country-specific activity data with either nationally developed key parameter or measurements derived from country-specific parameters. We choose Tier 2 because of our ability to collect and estimate good quality country-specific activity data on historical and current waste disposal.
Tier 2 emission estimate was therefore conducted using the IPCC FOD method with default parameters and country-specific activity data. The FOD method assumes that degradable organic carbon (DOC) in SWDS decays slowly over time forming CH4 and carbon dioxide CO2 in the process [4]. The method also assumes that emissions from CH4 and CO2 in SWDS are higher in the first few decades after waste is deposited and as time goes on, there is a steady decline in emissions because the degradable carbon in the waste is consumed by bacteria responsible for decay.

## Reporting Results
The reporting result is submitted to the African Development Bank and will be made available upon official publicaton. However, the draft report can be viewed [here](../assets/pdfs/GHG_Emissions_from_Waste_Management_in_Nigeria__Analyzing_Circular_Economy_Impacts.pdf).

## Reference lists
[1] IK Adewumi, MO Ogedengbe, JA Adepetu, and YL Fabiyi. “Planning organic fertilizer industries for municipal solid wastes management”. In: Journal of Applied Sciences Research 1.3 (2005), pp. 285–291 (pages 3, 14).  
[2] Sunil Namdeo Thitame, GM Pondhe, and DC Meshram. “Characterisation and composition of municipal solid waste (MSW) generated in Sangamner City, District Ahmednagar, Maharashtra, India”. In: Environmental monitoring and assessment 170.1 (2010), pp. 1–5 (pages 3, 14).  
[3] Ekaba Bisong. Building machine learning and deep learning models on Google cloud platform. Springer, 2019 (pages 3, 15).  
[4] Pipatti R., Svardal P., Alves JWS., Gao Q., Cabrera CL., Mareckova K., Oonk H., Scheehle E., Sharma C., Smith A., Yamada M., Coburn JB., Pingoud K., Thorsen G., and Wagner F. “2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories: Waste”. In: 5 (2006) (pages 4, 13, 52–56).  
